in this video let us learn how to implement a
stack using a linked list
We know we can implement a stack using an array
But if we implement the stack using an array we
need to specify the arrays size at the beginning
That is at compile time
We cannot change the size of an array at run time
so it will only work for a fixed number
of elements
And the solution to this problem is we can implement
the stack using the linked list in a linked list
We can change its size at runtime so let's see
how to perform push and pop operation
When we implement stack using linked list we should create
the linked list in reverse order so that the head
node will always point the last inserted data
So first let us push a value into the stack
and had first the stack is empty so
node head equal to null and we have the push
function to push a value into the stack and we
will pass the value to be inserted into this function
so we have public void push of into val let
the value to be inserted be 10
First we have to create a new node to store
this value
So write node new node equal to new node
So a new node is created
And now we need to add the value to it
So write new node dot data equal to val
So 10 is added to this node
Now the node is ready and what can be inserted
It should be inserted before the head
That is It should point the head
So write
New node dot Next equal to head and make it
the head of the list
So write head equal to new node
So one element is inserted into this stack
Now let us insert another element 20 to this stack
So call push of 20 and used new to create
a new node
So a new node is created
And now we need to add the value to it
So write New node dot data equal to val
so twenties is stored in it So the node is created with the value
and it should be pushed at the top of stack
or before the last inserted element
That is before head
So it should point to head
So write New node dot Next equal to head and
now may get the head of the linked list
Now let us insert another element 30 to this stack so call
push of 30 so created new node and now add
the value to it so 30 is stored in it
Now this new node should point to head
So we have new node dot next equal to head
And now make the new node the head of the
linked list
So that is how push operation can be performed
Now let us see how to perform pop operation
So we know push and Pop operation is performed at the
top of the stack
So from where should be delete the element from this
list
It should be the head element which is poped and
the next element will become the new head
So let us see this pop function
So we have public void pop
And when we call this pop function the element at
the top of this stack that his head of linked
list will be removed
So first check If the stack is empty that is
if the head is null And if it is then
deletion is not possible since there are no elements to
delete so Print stack is empty but here it is
Not so Goto else
part and print the element which is to be poped
so Print popped element is head dot data
So we will get the output popped element equal to
Now we need to delete the head and make this
second node the head
So we have head equal to head dot
Next
So second node is the head now and that is
how we can perform pop operation
Now let us call pop again and first check if
the stack is empty
But it is not so go to else and print
the element at top
So we will get popped element to 20 and now
make this second node The head by writing head equal
to head dot Next So head equal to 1000 now and
the pop operation is completed now let us call pop
again
So first check if stack is empty But it is
not so go to else and print the element at
top
So we will get popped Element equal to 10 And
make this second node the head
So now head equal to null now call pop again
And in the function First we check If head
equal to null and it is true
So it prints Stack is empty so that is how
we can perform push and pop operation in a stack
using linked list
Now let us discuss about the time complexity as we
Just learnt in push operation the only need is to create
the node with the value and make it a point
to head
So only a constant time is needed
So the time complexity is order of one
Similarly in pop operation we only needed to check if
the stack is empty
Otherwise we deleted the head and made the next node
the head which only takes a constant time
So the time complexity is order of one.